AUDIENCES should not expect “In the Loop” to be bursting with uplifting moral lessons. “There are very few redeeming characters in it,” the film’s creator and director, the British writer Armando Iannucci, said recently. “I didn’t want to be thinking, ‘Oh, we have to have a happy ending or a song or something.’ ”

He is not kidding about the ending (or the song). It would be hard to find a more manipulatively back-stabbing or creatively foulmouthed bunch of hypocrites, bullies and cynics than exists in the warped landscape of “In the Loop,” a political satire about the diplomatic buildup to an unnamed Iraqesque war.

The movie, to be released in the United States on Friday, begins in London. Simon Foster (Tom Hollander), a hapless British cabinet minister with opinions above his station, is concluding a radio interview in which he has strayed alarmingly off script, describing the possibility of going to war as “unforeseeable.” With the debate over war consuming both the British and American governments and news media, Simon’s remark has all sorts of complicated diplomatic consequences.

More immediately it provokes the wrath of the prime minister’s communications director, Malcolm Tucker (Peter Capaldi), a man capable of ending a politician’s career with a flicker of his forked tongue.

Alert television viewers have already met this hilariously fearsome character in Mr. Iannucci’s BBC series “The Thick of It,” set in and around the intrigues of Whitehall and also starring Mr. Capaldi. But “In the Loop” takes its British characters out of London’s rarefied political snake pit and puts them into the big leagues, the even more viciously squabbling world of Washington. There they confront a dismaying truth: As special as the relationship between Britain and the United States may be, it is far more special to the British than it is to the Americans.

With nothing useful to do, Simon spends his first night in Washington in his out-of-the-way hotel, watching a documentary about sharks. Malcolm is palmed off on an absurdly young White House aide, a member, he complains, of the “master race of gifted toddlers” who appear to be running Washington.

Meanwhile governmental hawks and doves are grappling for supremacy, intelligence is being manufactured, nonexistent weapons are being unearthed, aides are viciously sharp-elbowing one another, and the clueless Simon is being used as a patsy by all sides. He also has an urgent problem back home: a collapsing garden wall belonging to an elderly constituent, whose son (the comic actor Steve Coogan) unfortunately has Simon’s cellphone number, a lot of free time and a serious anger management problem.

The jokes come at a rate of about three a sentence. But underneath the farce lies a deadly serious point about how Britain played into the United States’ hands in 2003, bolstering its arguments about the imminent danger posed by Saddam Hussein and thus helping guarantee that the war could go ahead.

“I’ve always wanted to make a funny film with lots of one-liners, like a screwball comedy,” Mr. Iannucci said in a telephone interview. “I was reading and researching into the lead-up to the invasion of Iraq, reading about all the dysfunction and competition in Washington and how the Brits got star-struck and were lured into it. I thought: Either you can scream your head off about how terrible this is, or you can say, ‘This is a farce.’ And then I thought, ‘That’s the story. That’s the film I want to make.’ ”

To get his foreign nuances right, Mr. Iannucci traveled to Washington and quizzed officials in Congress, the Pentagon and the State Department about the minutiae of their working lives. Among the Americans in the cast are a punchy James Gandolfini, playing a dovish general with a robust temper, and Mimi Kennedy and David Rasche, as mortal enemies in the upper echelons of the State Department. Anna Chlumsky and Zach Woods play aides intent on derailing each other’s careers; Mr. Woods’s character is named Chad, which gives rise to the obvious joke.

“We also did our own swearing research,” Mr. Iannucci said. That was necessary; characters in “In the Loop” curse with Shakespearian inventiveness. Interestingly, Mr. Iannucci said, he found that people in the Pentagon swear a great deal more than people in the State Department, and that “four-star generals are very foulmouthed.”

But few can match Malcolm Tucker for sheer verbal brio. He uses his dark arts to fine result when he persuades reporters to backtrack on stories critical of the government. “Whether it has happened or not is irrelevant — it is true,” he yells in one scene, making the case for reporting something that did not in fact happen.

Peter Capaldi is perhaps best known to Americans as the geekily adorable Scotsman in the 1983 film “Local Hero.” This makes for something of a mental disconnect.

“I find it quite exhausting because there is a considerable distance between him and me,” Mr. Capaldi said. “But being given this opportunity to play someone who is so Machiavellian and nasty and shouty is great.”

It has long been assumed that Malcolm is based on Alastair Campbell, former Prime Minister Tony Blair’s all-powerful strategizer, spokesman and interference blocker. (Mr. Campbell is credited, among other things, with coming up with Mr. Blair’s description of Diana, Princess of Wales, as “the people’s princess.”) Mr. Iannucci said Mr. Campbell was an influence on, but not the only model for, the character; Mr. Capaldi said he looked elsewhere for inspiration.

“I didn’t know how he spoke or how he behaved,” he said by telephone, referring to Mr. Campbell. “The only people I knew who spoke in this way with great torrents of verbosity and very aggressive techniques were American agents. You think back to the old days of I.C.M. and C.A.A. and all those guys in power suits bursting into immense volcanic eruptions of foul language.”

The film is an amalgam of scripted lines, exhaustively written, rewritten and honed during weeks of rehearsals by Mr. Iannucci and three co-writers, and dialogue improvised as the cameras rolled and the actors were invited to riff. “I wanted the actors to be as exhausted and as stressed by the end as the characters they’re playing,” Mr. Iannucci said cheerily.

Indeed. “It’s easier to improvise drama, because you can go on and on for hours and hours being miserable,” Mr. Capaldi said. “But in comedy there’s the dual thing of trying to keep the plot going and delivering a laugh or a gag along the way.”

The film has been lovingly reviewed in Britain, where Mr. Iannucci is something of a favorite. What Americans will make of it is unclear. Mr. Iannucci said he purposely did not seek American financing so as not to have to modify his approach or soften his language. But early signs are good. The film was a hit at the Sundance Film Festival this year.

Speaking of British writers in general, Ms. Kennedy said: “They know how to bring comedy out of tragedy by observing human behavior. It goes back to Shakespeare.” Her vociferously antiwar character in “In the Loop,” Karen Clarke, is practically the only person who retains some degree of integrity. Sadly, it costs her her job and her dignity.

“It was humiliating,” she said of what Karen has to go through. “But therein lies the comedy.” 
