LIKE many people in his generation, Louie Psihoyos was a landlubber who grew up watching “Flipper” and Jacques Cousteau adventures on television. After National Geographic magazine hired him straight out of college as a staff photographer, his admiration for the intelligence and beauty of dolphins, and for the oceans as an ecological system, grew as he learned how to dive and began to work underwater.
Skip to next paragraph
Related
Video Trailer: 'The Cove'
Enlarge This Image
Oceanic Preservation Society

Dolphins performing at an aquatic park in Taiji, Japan, a small seaside town south of Osaka where most of “The Cove” was filmed.

But none of that quite prepared him for the experience of making “The Cove,” an award-winning documentary about the clandestine slaughter of dolphins in Japan that opens July 31. The film is the first that Mr. Psihoyos — “rhymes with sequoias,” he said — has directed, and everything about it has been a challenge, from having to make the transition from still photography, to the subject matter itself, to the cloak-and-dagger techniques used to obtain images that range, as Mr. Psihoyos put it, “from the heartbreakingly beautiful to the heartbreakingly sad.”

“The Cove,” in other words, is an unconventional documentary, one that looks very much like a feature film, with the dramatic arcs and suspense one would expect in a James Bond or Hollywood action movie. And because the film contains graphic images of the mass killing of a species of animal that humans regard fondly, with images as unsettling as those of baby seals being clubbed to death in Canada, it seems destined to generate an emotional and contentious debate.

Which is exactly what Mr. Psihoyos, 52, had in mind when he began filming “The Cove” in 2005. “What I set out to do was not so much make a movie as to create a movement,” he said by telephone from his office in Boulder, Colo. “This movie is a tool to shut this thing down and end the barbarism we saw back there in that cove.”

Commercial whaling has been outlawed worldwide since the mid-1980s, but that prohibition has not been extended to smaller cetaceans, or marine mammals, like dolphins, in large part because of Japan’s opposition. As a result around 21,000 dolphins are killed there each year, according to Japanese government estimates, in places like Taiji, a small seaside town south of Osaka where most of "The Cove" was filmed

Some of Mr. Psihoyos’s footage from Taiji, which the movie calls “a little town with a really big secret,” shows local fishermen and their allies trying to block his cameras and trailing and intimidating him and his crew. The fishermen seem to fear that if images of their bloody and brutal annual harvest, for food purposes and for what they call “pest control,” become widely known, the public in Japan and abroad will be so horrified and disgusted that it will demand an end to the slaughter.

In addition to its cast of dolphins “The Cove” has a central human character: Ric O’Barry, the original trainer of the five dolphins used to portray Flipper on the mid-1960s television series. He later became an ardent environmentalist campaigner and now serves as a marine mammal specialist for the Earth Island Institute in California and is the leader of the Save Japan Dolphins coalition.

Although Mr. O’Barry, 68, may be the protagonist of the film, he makes for an admittedly flawed hero. Not content to be simply passionate, he comes across as obsessed with his cause and interested in little else. But he said he is satisfied with the way he is portrayed in “The Cove” and grateful for the galvanizing effect he expects the film to have.

“I think it’s very fair, because I am a little crazed,” he said. “I am focused like a laser beam on the dolphin captivity issue, because I helped create this mess. I think about that cove every day, because once you have seen what goes on there — not the movie but the real thing — you can’t unsee it. So maybe I have crossed a line.”

“The Cove” has the feel and flow of a feature film in part because it did not suffer from the financial constraints that often afflict documentaries. One of Mr. Psihoyos’s dive buddies is Jim Clark, the billionaire founder of Netscape, who started the environmental group known as the Oceanic Preservation Society along with Mr. Psihoyos and agreed to bankroll “The Cove” more out of conviction than a desire to add to his bank account.

Mr. Psihoyos refers to the production team he hired, which included a pair of free divers, a maritime technician and a “clandestine operations” organizer, as “Oceans 11.” At one point they asked Industrial Lights & Magic, the George Lucas special effects company, to make fake rocks that could hide high-definition cameras and microphones, which were then secretly installed at the cove in Taiji.

In addition some of the filming was done at night, with the crew in camouflage and face paint and using military-style thermal cameras to film the fishermen and police officers who were trying to keep them away from the cove. Part of that material has ended up in the film, as has footage shot from unmanned aerial drones and a blimp equipped with a remote-controlled camera.
