“Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince,” the delayed sixth installment in the Warner Brothers franchise, sold an estimated $159.7 million in tickets in its first five days in North American theaters, according to box office tracking services. Its predecessor, “Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix,” was given a nearly identical release in July 2007 and earned $140 million over five days.

For the three-day weekend, “Half-Blood Prince” was easily No. 1 with estimated ticket sales of $79.5 million. (“Order of the Phoenix” sold a comparable $77 million.)

The weekend was considerably less rosy for a struggling Universal Pictures, which saw “Brüno” crater. That risk-taking comedy, crude even by R-rated standards, sold an estimated $8.4 million in tickets, a steep 73 percent drop from its No. 1 opening last weekend. Total domestic sales for “Brüno” are about $50 million.

Returns for the well-reviewed “Half-Blood Prince” are impressive for numerous reasons — not the least of which is that movie franchises tend to peak (both creatively and financially) long before the sixth entry. Warner also risked alienating fans by delaying its release by eight months, a move that was partly a consequence of last year’s writers’ strike.

In particular there was fretting from news media outlets that “Twilight” had stolen Harry Potter’s mojo among teenage girls. That proved a fantasy. Although Warner was still sorting through demographics information early Sunday — and the overall audience is aging (along with the cast) — the studio said 40 percent of the audience was under 18.

“It just shows that fantasy doesn’t age, and new fans are coming to this franchise all the time,” said Dan Fellman, Warner’s president for domestic theatrical distribution.

Warner was forced to leave 3-D money on the table over the weekend. Because of the date change “Half-Blood Prince” was only able to secure three Imax theaters, most of which are still busy showing “Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen.” The 3-D Imax format has become increasingly popular with moviegoers and can boost box office results dramatically because its tickets sell for a $3 to $5 premium. “Half-Blood Prince” will expand into about 190 Imax theaters in the weeks to come.

It should be noted that many people interested in going to the movies over the weekend didn’t have much choice but to see “Half-Blood Prince.” A huge number — 4,325 theaters — showed the film, many on multiple screens, and Hollywood got out of Harry Potter’s way almost entirely; the only other movie to open over the weekend was the Fox Searchlight romance “(500) Days of Summer,” in 27 theaters.

For the year ticket sales stand at about $5.98 billion, a 10 percent increase over the same period last year, according to Hollywood.com, which tracks box office results. Attendance is up about 8 percent.

For the weekend “Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs” (20th Century Fox) was second with $17.7 million, bringing its domestic total to $152 million. “Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen,” a Paramount/DreamWorks release, was third with $13.8 million ($364 million total).

“Brüno” was fourth. Rounding out the Top 5 was “The Hangover” from Warner, with $8.3 million ($236 million total to date).
