That teaser, posted last fall on Facebook by the upstart company Mass Animation, kicked off a project many people in Hollywood thought was laughable: making a five-minute animated film using the Wikipedia model, with animators from around the world contributing shots, and Facebook users voting on their favorites.

But it worked. The completed short, “Live Music,” has been deemed of high enough quality by Sony Pictures Entertainment to warrant a theatrical run. Sony will bring the tale of star-crossed love involving an electric guitar and a violin to the multiplex masses on Nov. 20 as an opener for its “Planet 51” animated feature. “Social networks can operate like automated talent scouts, helping the cream rise more quickly to the top, and that’s what happened with ‘Live Music,’ ” said Michael Lynton, chairman and chief executive of Sony’s entertainment division. “While creativity has been pretty evenly distributed in society, it hasn’t always been easy to tap into.”

Few actually expect “Live Music” to win an Academy Award or even be nominated for one. But even Pixar started somewhere, and Sony’s enthusiasm for the short underscores the potential power of social networking in creating high-quality content.

The marketplace — advertising, gaming and, of course, Hollywood — is hungry for content, animated in particular, that is done in a faster, cheaper way. “Live Music” was made for about $1 million and took about six months to complete. Intel, hoping to peddle its new Core i7 processor to animation geeks, was the principal backer. The finished film is made up of scenes submitted by 51 people, who received $500 per scene and a film credit for their efforts.

Yair Landau, the founder of Mass Animation (and a former digital and animation executive at Sony, where he oversaw production of the movie “Surf’s Up”), said he hoped “Live Music” was just the tip of this iceberg. His goal is to produce a feature-length film in the same manner, essentially pushing the heavy lifting off on a crowd.

“I certainly see this as a step in the democratization of creative storytelling in Hollywood,” Mr. Landau said. “But my aim was primarily to prove that you could bring a group of people together on the Internet and create good work.”

Mass Animation is just one of several entertainment companies working the “crowdsourcing” angle. Perhaps the largest is Aniboom, which was founded in 2006 by the Israeli media mogul Uri Shinar and bills itself as a Web-based animation studio. Aniboom has built a global team of nearly 8,000 animators who have uploaded more than 13,000 clips into Aniboom’s library.

Mr. Shinar plans to pitch the best submissions to television networks as potential series and movie studios as possible features. (The creators retain some ownership rights.) Aniboom is showing big potential, signing a flurry of deals in recent months. Aniboom and the Fox television network, for instance, recently announced a project similar to “Live Music” that involves animators competing to create a new holiday special.

“We’re proving in small steps that without any physical studio you can create professional content,” Mr. Shinar said. Aniboom ran the “Live Music” competition for Mass Animation and provided technology infrastructure.

Mr. Landau, a former investment banker whom Sony credits with securing the film rights to “Spider-Man,” has always been an early adopter. At Sony he was an advocate for multiplayer online games before they broke into the public consciousness, and developed a downloadable movie service before online piracy became entrenched.

He left Sony in spring 2008, partly because of a desire to move on after two decades at the studio but also because of an internal shakeup. To create the “Live Music” project, he first approached Matt Jacobson, a friend at Facebook who works on market development, who in turn introduced him to executives at Intel. (“We seized the opportunity to be involved with a project on the cutting edge of social media,” said John Cooney, Intel’s online programs manager.)

Using Facebook, Mass Animation invited animation enthusiasts — from total amateurs to professionals working in their spare time — to compete to create individual shots for the short. Mass Animation provided downloadable Maya software, the story and a soundtrack. The company also rendered the first scene to set the style and look. Mr. Landau then worked with the winners to smooth their creations into a cohesive whole.

In the end 57,000 people from 101 countries became “fans” of the Mass Animation page on Facebook and about 17,000 downloaded the software application, Mr. Landau said. The 51 winning animators hail from 17 countries, including Kazakhstan and Colombia. Eleven are women — the Hollywood animation mines are staffed almost entirely by men — and the group ranges in age from 14 to 48.

Mr. Jacobson called aspects of the project “fiendishly complicated” but said Facebook now wanted to work with Mass Animation on more ambitious ideas, perhaps even the dream of a full-blown feature film. “We didn’t know if we could do it, but we decided to take the chance and couldn’t be more pleased with how it turned out,” he said.
