ANY profession whose most famous movie incarnation is a ruthless serial killer with a taste for human flesh has, I think it’s fair to say, something of an image problem.
Skip to next paragraph
Enlarge This Image
Glen Wilson/Universal Studios

Anthony Hopkins as Dr. Hannibal Lecter in “Red Dragon,” the 2002 prequel to the 1991 film “Silence of the Lambs.”

Dr. Henry Carter (Kevin Spacey), the title psychiatrist of Jonas Pate’s “Shrink,” opening Friday, is by every rational standard a woeful specimen of the mental-health practitioner. The doctor does not inspire confidence: he doesn’t shave, tends to sleep in his clothes and is pretty much permanently stoned on pot (sometimes enhanced with substantial quantities of alcohol). The blank stare he trains on his patients is not a therapeutic technique, a pose of studied indifference — it’s actual indifference. But he doesn’t bite anybody’s face off.

In the age of Hannibal Lecter this has to qualify as a fairly positive depiction of the professional psychotherapist. Since Dr. Lecter came on the movie scene, the concept “First, do no harm” has taken on an entirely new meaning: Dr. Carter’s patients don’t seem to derive much benefit from his half-hearted ministrations, but at least they get off his couch alive. And because he practices in Los Angeles, they barely notice how weird he is. They’re not judgmental: for all they know he’s an eccentric genius, using his own emotional dishevelment and brazen boredom as a radical, innovative approach to the treatment of their neuroses.

Psychiatry is inherently such a peculiar science (or art) that it can be hard to be sure, at any moment, exactly what the therapist is up to or whether the patient is making any progress at all. And it’s murderously difficult to represent this mysterious process on screen. Classic Freudian analysis — and most cinematic shrinks are Freudians — takes years and in narrative terms demands far too many momentum-killing flashbacks and dream sequences, to say nothing of the swelling, triumphant music required to accompany every “breakthrough.” In this direction lies madness, or “The Prince of Tides.”

When the filmgoing public knew less about psychiatry you could cut a few corners, though. Alfred Hitchcock’s 1946 “Spellbound,” in which Dr. Ingrid Bergman roots around in the mind of an amnesiac Gregory Peck to solve a murder, opens with a helpful explanation, “Our story deals with psychoanalysis, the method by which modern science treats the emotional problems of the sane.” More words scroll down the screen: “The analyst seeks only to induce the patient to talk about his hidden problems, to open the locked doors of the mind. Once the complexes that have been disturbing the patient have been uncovered and interpreted, the illness and confusion disappear ... and the devils of unreason are driven from the human soul.” In “Spellbound” the devils are dispatched in just under two hours — still the land-speed record for psychiatric cures.

In that bygone era psychotherapists, though they might have seemed a bit exotic, were accorded a certain respect, as most doctors were: they were expected to perform miracles, and their patients were duly grateful. Not any more. Hollywood’s familiarity with psychiatrists — and our filmmakers are no strangers to the couch — has bred something more like contempt, to the point where a mumbling, depressive wreck like the hero of “Shrink” seems more the norm than the exception.

Carter is, in a way, a direct descendant of the “genius” Dr. Fritz Fassbender played by Peter Sellers, in a Beatle wig, in Clive Donner’s 1965 farce “What’s New Pussycat?” Fassbender — or, as he sometimes prefers to be called, “Baby Fritz” — favors unorthodox techniques, like chasing his comelier female patients around the room and asking his male patients probing questions like “Do you like thighs?” (To which he adds, candidly, “I like thighs.”)

“What’s New Pussycat?,” written by Woody Allen, was a landmark in movie attitudes toward psychiatrists, who have since then been portrayed almost exclusively as either ridiculous, or sinister, or both. (On those rare occasions when a filmmaker has tried to present an old-style — serious, conscientious, Ingrid Bergmanlike — psychiatrist, as Barbra Streisand did, directing herself, in “The Prince of Tides,” the audience and the critics supply the derision all by themselves.)

Paul Mazursky used his own therapist, Dr. Donald F. Muhich, for a hilarious scene in “Bob & Carol & Ted & Alice” (1969), in which his impassivity and pregnant silences elicit from his dazed patient one outrageous Freudian slip after another, and when she has her big moment of insight, he tells her that her time is up.

Jokes like these have become standard now: the enigmatic, sphinxlike gaze, the toneless “And how do you feel about that?,” the premature ejection from the therapy session. (Michael Caine works some particularly alarming variations in Brian De Palma’s sly 1980 thriller, “Dressed to Kill.”) It’s tempting to speculate, at times, on filmmakers’ motives for treating psychiatrists so rudely, to suspect that there might be just the hint of a desire for revenge on the perpetrators of their own failed, ruinously expensive adventures in self-knowledge.

You can’t mistake the glee with which Frank Oz in “What About Bob?” (1991) savors the spectacle of a psychiatrist’s descent into gibbering idiocy, and the triumph of the persistent, multiphobic, cheerfully manipulative analysand named Bob. It’s very funny — Bob is played by Bill Murray at his most unhinged, the psychiatrist by Richard Dreyfuss at his most grinningly uptight — but it’s a little creepy too.

You have to wonder, really, why psychiatrists come in for so much abuse in the movies these days. Is it merely a kind of natural resentment of people who presume to understand us? Is it those “primitive” fertility statues in their offices? Maybe it’s just that the profession, at least as imagined by Freud, seems to be attacking the afflictions of humankind on the wrong fronts now, insisting on the value of teasing out what we repress at a time when repression isn’t, truth to tell, much of an issue for the twittering populace. Not many devils of unreason behind locked doors anymore. They’re all out there for everyone to see: on computer screens, giant high-res televisions, and, of course, movie screens.

And how do you feel about that?
