“Let’s use some Atlanta drug money,” said Facundo M. Fernández, a chemistry professor, as he picked out a limp, ratty dollar bill from his wallet and handed it to one of his graduate students.
Skip to next paragraph
RSS Feed

    * Get Science News From The New York Times »

Enlarge This Image
Thomas Fuller/International Herald Tribune

FOCUS Army officials in Myanmar point out a region in a part of Asia where fake drugs have been found.

Minutes later, after running the bill through the laboratory’s high-tech machinery, the chemists had found what they were looking for: traces of cocaine.

Dr. Fernández, a professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology, said that the demonstration, which he repeated with other bills provided by a reporter, showed both how pervasive cocaine was in the United States and how sensitive his machines were.

They can instantly identify the chemical makeup of food, drugs and just about anything placed in front of their stainless-steel aperture. The uses of the machines, known as mass spectrometers, are manifold — the federal Department of Homeland Security has commissioned Dr. Fernández to study whether the technology can help sniff for explosives at airports.

But Dr. Fernández’s main focus is counterfeit pharmaceutical drugs, especially in poorer countries, where government regulation is weak. He is part of an informal group of researchers and government officials spanning Africa, Asia and the United States who have teamed up with Interpol, the international police agency, to use cutting-edge technology in tracking fake drugs that claim to treat malaria. Counterfeit malaria drugs are of particular concern because of the scale and severity of the disease — it kills more than 2,000 children a day in Africa alone — and fears that fake or substandard malaria drugs are aggravating a growing problem of drug resistance.

For years, scientists have been able to analyze the ingredients of a pill or capsule using mass spectrometers, which identify chemicals by measuring molecular weights. But the overall process was time-consuming, taking about an hour per sample.

A scientific breakthrough in 2005 added an “ion gun” to the machines and allowed Dr. Fernández to check hundreds of pills a day. A technician simply holds the sample — a pill, dog food or a dollar bill, for example — up to the machine, which emits a jet of helium gas and captures a minute amount of the material, instantly identifying its component parts.

Contrary to the common belief that counterfeit drugs are just sugar pills, Dr. Fernández said, most fakes have some level of active ingredient. Many contain the cheap and readily available pain reliever paracetamol, which might temporarily soothe some symptoms but will not fight the underlying disease.

Sometimes researchers find harmful or very unexpected chemicals. Once, when analyzing what was suspected to be a counterfeit antimalarial pill, his team discovered traces of sildenafil, the main ingredient in the anti-impotency drug Viagra.

“We feel like detectives,” said Dr. Fernández, who is from Argentina. “You never know what you’re going to find.”

The counterfeit drug business has become increasingly attractive for criminal syndicates; the profit potential is vast, yet the punishment for those caught is typically much less severe than for illegal drugs like cocaine, law enforcement officials say.

This is especially true in Asia, where many countries impose the death penalty for trafficking heroin, Ecstasy or even marijuana but where combating counterfeit drugs is not a priority.

Three years ago, the World Health Organization estimated that as many as one in four pharmaceutical drugs sold in the developing world were counterfeit. It is impossible to know the exact level, but there is general agreement that the level of fake drugs is “unacceptably high,” in the words of the organization.

“We have discovered that no class of drugs had been spared,” said Aline Plançon, the head of Interpol’s counterfeit drug department. “It’s not just primary medicines. There’s also lifestyle drugs, herbal drugs, vaccines.”

Counterfeiters have become more sophisticated in recent years, churning out pills and packaging that look like the real thing.

But as the work of Dr. Fernández and others indicates, the sleuthing, too, is becoming more high-tech, relying on innovative forensic tools.

Dallas C. Mildenhall, another scientist in the anti-counterfeit network, helps track fake drugs by analyzing the microscopic pollen grains embedded in the pills or packaging. Forensic investigators have used pollen grains for decades to help solve murders and other crimes, but Dr. Mildenhall pioneered using the tiny grains, which are ubiquitous in clothing, nostrils, hair, food and nearly everything exposed to air, to help combat counterfeiters.

Because many plants are specific to certain parts of the world, pollen helps determine where the drugs were manufactured. “Pollen markers give you an idea of the environment,” Dr. Mildenhall said by telephone from his office in New Zealand, where he is a researcher at GNS Science, a government organization. “Is it wet, dry, hot, cold? Are the soils acidic or not?”

Dr. Mildenhall’s work has helped establish that many counterfeits come from the border area between China and Vietnam as well as the general vicinity of the Golden Triangle, the area famous for heroin production where the borders of Laos, Myanmar and Thailand meet.

Three years ago, an analysis by Dr. Mildenhall of both pollen grains and specific minerals found in counterfeits helped pinpoint production to one particular site in southern China. In what was dubbed Operation Jupiter, Interpol handed over the evidence, and the Chinese government arrested three suspects.

Dr. Mildenhall is now involved in a project led by Paul N. Newton, the head of the Oxford University Center for Tropical Medicine in Laos, to determine whether counterfeit antimalarial drugs found in Africa were imported from Asia or manufactured locally.
