WHISTLER, British Columbia — Dean Nelson has a vivid imagination. He can stand in a 920-square-foot hotel conference room, set up for a business meeting in mid-July, and see a sometimes-smoldering, sometimes-pulsating party club there by February.
Skip to next paragraph
Related
Times Topics: Homosexuality
Enlarge This Image
Jim Wilson/The New York Times

Pride House will be on the ground floor of the Pan Pacific Hotel in Whistler, British Columbia, where the Olympic skiing and sliding events will be held.

He can see a giant rainbow flag hanging outside and a line to the door. Mostly, though, Nelson can see a comfortable, inclusive hangout for gays, perhaps some of the hundreds of athletes at the 2010 Vancouver Olympics who will be competing in and around this bustling ski town. And he can see it making a statement to everyone outside of Pride House.

“We anticipate Pride House is going to rock the Olympics,” Nelson said.

Every Olympics includes temporary, carefully designed places for athletes and officials from various countries to socialize — a U.S.A. House, a Canadian Pavilion, a Russia House and so on. Holland House, sponsored by Heineken, is often the biggest and boldest.

Pride House is believed to be the first such house for gay and lesbian athletes and their friends and families.

“It has never been done,” Nelson said. “It’s sort of a taboo subject that everyone is a little afraid to touch. But since we’re touching it, everyone is like, ‘Yea, you run with it.’ ”

Nelson is a veteran planner of events in Whistler, a two-hour drive from Vancouver and the site of the 2010 Olympic skiing and sliding events. As chief executive of a promotional company called GayWhistler, which is organizing Pride House, Nelson oversees the annual Winter Pride festival. The festival, previously called Gay Ski Week, attracted 2,800 people this year.

Getting into some of the houses and pavilions can be an Olympic event in itself, requiring well-placed connections or medal-worthy schmoozing. Nelson said that there would be no requirements, including being gay, to get into Pride House.

“Our space is very inclusive,” he said, almost apologetically adding: “But there may be a wait.”

One part of the picture in Nelson’s mind that remains fuzzy is whether Olympic athletes, gay or not, will go to Pride House. It is unknown how many, if any, of the Olympians who will compete next year are openly gay.

“I’m guessing, because that stigma still exists, it will be a modest turnout,” said Greg Larocque, president of the Gay and Lesbian International Sport Association — North America, which is throwing its support behind Pride House. “But the fact that it exists is the story. Three Olympics from now, who knows what Pride House will look like?”

Sports, often cited as a barrier breaker for civil rights causes, has not had the same impact for the gay rights movement. Fearing a negative reaction from teammates, fans and marketers, few athletes have willingly announced that they are gay during their competitive careers.

“Present company included,” said Mark Tewksbury, who won a gold medal in swimming for Canada in 1992 and came out in 1998.

If a Pride House had existed in 1992, Tewksbury said, he “probably would have been one of those people standing around to check everything out, see who was going in and out.”

“I would certainly be curious,” he said.

There is no doubt he will be there this time.

“And I’ll pull a few of my big-name Olympic friends with me,” Tewksbury said.

Tewksbury said he doubted that any athletes would visit the house before they competed, while adhering to a strict training schedule. Even after competition, some may want to avoid sparking any public curiosity about their sexuality.

“I would be pleasantly surprised if a number of athletes felt comfortable and went there, maybe after they were finished competing,” Tewksbury said.

If nothing else, organizers of Pride House hope to ignite conversations around the world. In many countries — close to 70, by some counts —being gay is considered a crime worthy of prison time. A few still execute people for it.

“The value, internationally, is that young athlete leaders and coaches see a different paradigm,” Larocque said. “And that it can work, and it does work.”

Nelson said that Pride House would be prepared to help any gay athletes seeking asylum from their countries.

Pride House will be on the ground floor of the Pan Pacific Hotel in Whistler Village. Nelson, a former sales director for the hotel, said he found a willing partner in Pan Pacific, based in Singapore.

“We’re honored to be able to host this,” Dave Wilkin, director of operations for Pan Pacific’s two Whistler hotels, said. “It’s a very historical occasion.”

There was no hesitation in aligning with Pride House, Wilkin said, and no one advised him against it.

Nelson has ideas of how he wants to convert the L-shaped room, which has a capacity of about 100 and an outdoor entrance near the front of the hotel. A preview will come during the Whistler Film Festival in December, when Nelson will use the same space to create a club for gays.

But this was July, and the flowers were in bloom and people sauntered through the village in T-shirts and shorts. Still, Nelson could imagine the scene in little more than six months, when snow is falling and the world’s gaze will have turned toward the Winter Games.

“I expect we’ll have a few athletes who will come out and celebrate their true, authentic self,” Nelson said.

Then he allowed himself to imagine even more — someone celebrating victory at Pride House.

“ ‘I’m gay, and I won gold,’ ” Nelson said. “That would send a pretty powerful message.”
