I get a lot of e-mail messages about golf rules. Some read like this:
Skip to next paragraph
Charlie Riedel/Associated Press

Taking a drop, as Hunter Mahan did this year in the second round at the Masters.
Related
On Par: Maybe Mike, Jeff and Steve Should Stick to Tennis (July 20, 2009)
On Par | Q & A With Samuel L. Jackson: On Golf, Giving and Kenny G. (July 20, 2009)

Bill, yesterday I popped up my tee shot into a tree. As the ball was coming down, a squirrel caught it in its mouth and ran off into a muddy lateral water hazard, where it dropped the ball. I could still play the ball, but my uncle said I should climb the tree and place it nearest to the point where the squirrel caught my ball, because the squirrel is an outside agency and I’m not responsible for its actions. I don’t like climbing trees, so I walked into the hazard to play my ball, but then I tripped and had to stick my 7-iron in the mud to keep from falling. That’s when my uncle said he was penalizing me a stroke for grounding my club in a hazard. He has to be my least favorite uncle, so I ignored him and instead went back and reteed, invoking the “squirrel do-over” rule. Bill, what do you think?

What do I think?

I think that squirrel should play second base for the Mets. Catching a pop-up without a glove, or a $6 million salary? That’s amazing.

My other thought is that this didn’t really happen, because you’re one of those people who like to bother other people with hypothetical golf rules situations. There’s always some guy sitting at the 19th hole saying, “What if. ...”

We have no use for those guys. But I admit that I receive a ton of genuine questions, so I am convinced that people are legitimately confused by golf’s rules, especially beginners.

I am not a rules official, nor do I play one in online videos. I am usually the sap breaking the rules (see our latest video at nytimes.com/sports). But I know a lot of rules officials, and they agree with me that although it is a fun hobby (i.e., obsession) of many golfers to contemplate (i.e., waste time over) the intricacies of the rules, many more are bewildered by them. The excuse usually given is that the rules are too complicated.

But come on, there are basic rules that are not hard to understand. Here are 10 that everyone should know, and they are also the 10 most abused:

KEEP YOUR EYE ON THE BALL Before you start your round, you must be able to identify the ball you are playing. When two or three people hit into the same patch of woods off the first tee, you’re not supposed to say: “I think I hit a Top-Flite, or a Titleist or a Tour-something. It definitely began with a T.”

This is not a minor thing to know, especially for beginners who spray the ball a bit.

BAG CHECK If you want to carry 16 clubs in your bag because you’re trying out two putters and an extra driver, at least know that you’re violating the rule that permits just 14 clubs.

You probably mean no harm, and there’s room for experimenting, but your playing partners may want to get a little side bet going, and they could have an opinion about your extra baggage.

TEEING OFF You can tee your ball at or just behind the imaginary line drawn between the front of the tee markers, but you don’t have to. This, in fact, is usually where you’ll find the most divots and inadequate grass. You can tee your ball up to two club lengths back from the markers, while staying between them. You won’t miss the extra three feet, but you might get a flatter, smoother lie.

OUT-OF-BOUNDS-OPTIONS If you hit your ball out of bounds, you must hit another one from the same spot as the original shot, or as near to it as possible. If on the tee, you can retee. Out-of-bounds areas are defined by white stakes. There is a one-stroke penalty. If you’re not sure if your shot went out, announce that you are hitting a provisional ball. You must declare it. If you find the original shot in bounds, great. If not, play the provisional.

LOSE A BALL? SEE 'OUT OF BOUNDS' If you hit a ball and think it’s lost, the rule is the same as for a ball hit out of bounds. If you didn’t see where it went or if it looked as if it was heading for the cemetery across the highway, accept the likely mortality of your shot. Hit a provisional. You’re allowed five minutes to look for the first ball.

DIVINING WATER HAZARDS If you hit a ball into a water hazard, typically defined by yellow stakes, you can always try playing it out of the hazard, which could work if you don’t mind playing the rest of the day with mud in your hair. Otherwise, you have two options: the now-familiar play-it-from-the-spot-of-the-previous-shot option, or — and pay attention, because this is the most misunderstood rule in golf — you can drop a ball behind the water hazard. But you must keep the point where the original ball last crossed the margin of the hazard between you and the hole. 
