IT’S getting more expensive to take Fifi on vacation. Airlines may be raising the price of in-flight food and checked luggage, but pet owners say the fees for flying with their furry friends are getting out of control.
Readers' Comments

    "Pet lovers and the rest of us will not see eye to eye on this one. "

G-AZ, Tucson, AZ

    * Read Full Comment »
    * Post a Comment »

A number of airlines — including Alaska, American, JetBlue, US Airways and Virgin America — raised their pet fees by about $20 or more in the last year or so, and now charge $100 each way to take a pet on a flight. Continental, Midwest and United now charge $125 to bring a pet onboard, up from $100 previously.

Expect to pay even more to check in larger pets as luggage. Those fees now range from $300 round trip on American to $500 on United. It goes even higher for international flights.

These days, with airfares so low, a pet’s fee can be more than a human’s ticket.

James Garahan, an international tax lawyer from San Francisco, paid $299 for a round-trip flight from San Francisco to New York in December on United. But to take his 13-pound pug, Sophie, with him, United wanted an extra $350. (United has since lowered the cost to $125 each way, from $175, but that is still higher than the $100 it charged last spring.)

Mr. Garahan views the fee as “discriminatory against pet owners.” Sophie, he points out, rides under the seat in front of him — “space I have already paid for.”

But for airlines, it’s another way to eke out more revenue. American, for example, raised its pet charges in May 2008 — the same time it began charging for things like a second checked bag. “The bottom line is that our fares and our fees together must cover our operating costs if we are to remain viable for the long term,” said Andrea Huguely, an American spokeswoman.

Pet owners say they simply have no choice but to pay whatever the airlines charge.

“People that want to travel with pets are pretty much at their mercy,” said Jerry Hatfield, a spokesman for Pet Travel Inc., which offers an online guide at www.pettravel.com. “If it’s $100, that’s what it is. There are no other options. Amtrak isn’t accepting any pets.”

Actually, there is a new option: Pet Airways (www.petairways.com), a pet-only airline based in Delray Beach, Fla., is beginning service this month. It plans to fly to smaller regional airports near New York City (Republic on Long Island), Washington (Baltimore/Washington International), Chicago (Midway), Denver (Rocky Mountain Metro) and Los Angeles (Hawthorne Municipal).

Aimed at pet owners frustrated with the high cost and poor service associated with most airlines, Pet Airways promises to fly animals in a climate-controlled cabin outfitted with individual crates instead of seats, and staffed with a flight attendant who will check on animals every 15 minutes. The company uses Beech 1900C turbo-props, some versions of which are 19-seat commuter planes.

Tickets for the flights, operated once a week by Suburban Air Freight based in Omaha, Neb., start at $149 each way. There is already a waiting list for the first month, according to Alysa Binder, a founder of the company.

“Size doesn’t matter, snout noses don’t matter,” Ms. Binder said. “It’s all about the pets.”

Commercial airlines typically will not accept snub-nosed dogs like pugs or cats like Persians as cargo as they tend to be sensitive to heat. Also, many airlines will not accept pets as checked baggage or cargo when the ground temperature exceeds 85 degrees or is below 20 degrees.

Frontier Airlines has barred pets from cabins. “It’s a customer service issue,” said Steve Snyder, an airline spokesman, noting that customers can still transport pets on Frontier as luggage for $100 or $200 each way depending on size. “There are a lot of folks that may have allergies to pets, or may have a fear of dogs or cats or may not want to be bothered by somebody else’s pets.”

But some airlines are trying to be more pet friendly. Delta, which had some of the highest fees, lowered its rates this month to $100 each way, from $150, for carry-on pets on domestic flights, and to $175 from $275 for pets checked as luggage.

JetBlue, which transports more than 80,000 pets a year, created a frequent flier program for pets, JetPaws, which allows customers to earn double miles when bringing along their furry friends. Continental and Midwest have similar programs.

Perhaps sensing a competitive niche, Southwest last month began charging $75 to take small dogs and cats onboard, undercutting most other airlines. And on July 1, Air Canada began charging 50 Canadian dollars (about $42 at 1.19 Canadian dollars to the U.S. dollar) each way for pets.

Other tips to keep to mind:

• Airlines limit the number of pets on each flight, so book early if you plan to bring your pet.

• To avoid delays and reduce the stress on your pet, book a nonstop flight whenever possible.

• If checking your pet as luggage, avoid booking a mid-day flight in summer, when the cargo hold can be dangerously warm.

• “I recommend feeding them about four hours before the flight, if possible,” said Melissa Halliburton, founder of BringFido.com, a travel site for dog owners. “They can and should continue to drink water right up to the time of travel, though.”

• After purchasing an appropriate pet carrier, write your pet’s name on it, including identification tags with your home address and phone number as well as the address and phone number of your destination, Ms. Halliburton suggests. If two or more pets are traveling together in cargo, put a sign on their crates indicating that they be placed near one another during the flight.

But if your pet is an anxious flier, consider leaving it home. Sitters can be found online at Petsit.com and Petsitters.org.

Mr. Garahan, the tax lawyer, ended up hiring a pet sitter for $25 a day for his pug. But next time, Mr. Garahan may have to spring for Sophie’s flight since his wife, Pam Dickson, often travels to New York City for business.

“When I show up in New York, she’s happy to see me,” Mr. Garahan said of his wife. “But if I’m bringing Sophie, she’s really happy to see me.”
